---
layout: default
title: "EJCP : édition 2022"
date: 2022-05-29
permalink: /ejcp2022
---

| [Main](./index) | [EJCP2022](./ejcp2022)| [EJCP2021](./ejcp2021) | [About](./about) | [Contact](./contact) |


## EJCP - version 2022, Semaine 26  en remote

TBD : inscription site sur scienceconf.org (validation en cours)

L'école aura lieu en distanciel, sur 5 après midi (15-18h heure de Paris). Ce sera l'occasion de l'ouvrir à nos cousins francophones du Québec.

### Programme

* lundi 4 juillet 2022 (slot à préciser dans le créneau 15-18) Andrei Paskevich Tuto Deductive Program Verification with Why3

>   Titre : Deductive Program Verification with Why3 
>   This lecture is an introduction to deductive program verification and a     
>   tutorial on the Why3 tool. Why3 provides a programming language with         
>   specification annotations, type polymorphism, mutable data types,            
>   algebraic data types, pattern matching, and exceptions. It allows us to      
>   verify annotated programs using automated and interactive theorem provers    
>   like Alt-Ergo, CVC4, Z3, Coq, and many others. This lecture introduces       
>   elementary concepts and techniques of program verification: pre- and         
>   postconditions, loop invariants, ghost code, termination proofs, modeling    
>   of data structures, etc.                                                     

>   Andrei Paskevich is associate professor at Paris-Saclay university and a     
>   member of the LMF laboratory. His research activities are in the field of    
>   formal methods, in particular, in deductive program verification. Together   
>   with his colleagues from Inria, CNRS, and CEA, he develops the Why3          
>   platform since 2010. 



* mardi 5 juillet 2022 (slot à préciser dans le créneau 15-18)

> Title: How can DSML help us formalize customer requirements? The use of      
>  formal verification methods ensures that the program conforms to the      
>  defined behavior. However, the definition of this behavior is a complex      
>  problem, requiring an understanding of both the business domain and the      
>  technical realities of the project management. Also, there is often a     
>  gap between the definition of the behavior from a business point of view     
>  and the more formal definition of verification methods. To facilitate     
>  the adoption of formal methods, language engineering and model         
>  engineering propose to make available models, based on formal semantic       
>  definitions. These models are linked to dedicated languages, and       
>  consequently more accessible and interoperable with existing models used     
>  by different stakeholders. In this talk, I will present how the        
>  definition of a Domain Specific Modeling Language and its formal       
>  semantics can bridge the gap between the expression of a customer      
>  requirement and the correction of the code that must satisfy this      
>  requirement. 
	 
	 
>  Bio: Florian Galinier did his PhD in the SM@RT team at IRIT     
>  (University of Toulouse). He is co-founder and CEO of the start-up        
>  SPILEn, in which he participates to the implementation of traceability       
>  and requirements formalization tools for the software industry. His       
>  research interests range from requirements engineering to model        
>  engineering, with a strong focus on industrial applications.
	 
	 


* mercredi 6 juillet 2022 (slot à préciser dans le créneau 15-18): Julien Signoles -- Abstract Interpretation with Frama-C 
                                                                   
     
> abstract: Abstract interpretation has been proposed as a systematic way to      
> build program analyzers that are always terminating (even if the underlying     
> program has infinite loops) and correct, in the sense that the analysis         
> captures all possible concrete behaviors of the program. It is at the core of    
> many analysis tools. In this talk, we will present the main features of         
> abstract interpretation and illustrate them with the Eva plug-in of Frama-C,    
> which uses abstract interpretation techniques to verify the absence of runtime  
> errors in C programs.     

                              
							  
> Bio: Julien Signoles is a senior researcher, expert in code analysis and formal      
> methods at Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, List, where he works since 2006 in     
> the Software Safety and Security Lab (LSL). He has been one of the main         
> developers of the Frama-C platform nearly since its inception and co-authored   
> around 50 peer-reviewed papers on Frama-C related topics. He gave tutorials     
> and training sessions on Frama-C in various academic and industrial venues and  
> teaches code analysis techniques (in particular, abstract interpretation,       
> deductive verification) since more than 12 years.    


* jeudi 7 juillet 2022 (slot à préciser dans le créneau 15-18): Charlotte Truchet Introduction à la programmation par contraintes

> La programmation par contraintes s'attache à résoudre des problèmes                                 
> fortement combinatoires, exprimés à l'aide de relations logiques (les                               
>       contraintes), portant sur des variables dans des domaines fixés,                                    
>       souvent finis. Chaque type de contraintes est dotée d'un algorithme de                              
>       propagation, qui élague autant que possible les domaines des variable                               
>       sans perdre de solutions. Les solveurs appliquent ces propagateurs                                  
>       tant que c'est possible, puis effectuent des choix (affectation d'une                               
>       valeur à une variable, réduction d'un domaine) et itèrent le                                        
>       processus. On sait aujourd'hui résoudre des familles de contraintes                                 
>       assez larges (cardinalité, graphes, mots, géométrie…). Dans ce cours,                               
>       je présenterai les notions principales du domaine (contraintes,                                     
>       domaines, consistance, propagation, heuristiques) puis je montrerai                                 
>       les liens entre la programmation par contraintes, et l'interprétation                               
>       abstraite. 




* vendredi 8 juillet 2022 (slot à préciser dans le créneau 15-18) Arthur Chargueraud -- Vérification de Programme avec CFML. 


>CFML est un outil permettant de prouver la correction fonctionnelle et
>la complexité asymptotique de programmes OCaml. CFML s'intègre dans
>l'assistant de preuve Coq, en s'appuyant sur la logique de séparation,
>et sur la technique des formules caractéristiques. Je présenterai les
>bases de la logique de séparation et de CFML, en présentant les deux
>premiers chapitres du cours Separation Logic Foundations, volume 6 de
>Software Foundations. Je vous proposerai au cours de la session des
>petits exercices pour vous familiariser avec le fonctionnement de
>CFML.



> Bio : Arthur Charguéraud is a researcher at Inria, first at Inria Saclay,
> then in the CAMUS team in Strabourg. His research interests span from
> formal verification and mechanized semantics to multicore
> programming. In particular, he is the main developer of the CFML tool,
> which has been put to practice to verify both the functional
> correctness and the amortized asymptotic complexity of nontrivial
>imperative programs such as the Union-Find data structure and a
>state-of-the-art incremental cycle detection algorithm. Besides,
>Arthur Charguéraud is vice-president of the nonprofit organization
>France-ioi, and co-organizer of the Bebras contest (concours Castor
>Informatique).



Orateur·rice·s:  Andrei Pakevitch, Charlotte Truchet, Arthur Chargueraud, Florian Galinier, Julien Signoles.


### Comité d'organisation
 * Laure Gonnord, Sébastien Mosser.
---
Pour plus d'information concernant l'EJCP22, vous pouvez écrire à
 [laure.gonnord@esisar.grenoble-inp.fr](mailto:laure.gonnord@esisar.grenoble-inp.fr)
